No, back to how you became dean.
Well, as I mentioned, I had no great aspirations to
be a dean. I enjoyed what I was doing as an associate
dean. When Dr. Price announced that he would like
to step down from the deanship after 16 hard years,
and be relieved of that responsibility and go back
to teaching and doing some other things he'd like
to do. I heard about it, never thought much about
it. Somebody pitched my name in the hat. You didn't
yourself? No. You didn't formally apply then? No.
Seldom done for administrative posts of this
nature. that I don't know who did. Somebody
submitted my name. It probably was some people
here that knew me. I had some former students who
were here. Dr. Leon Russell down at the Public
Health Department may have. I don't know who did.
But sometime along in the late fall of 1972 or maybe
early 1973, somebody, the search committee, I
don't recall who was chairman of it, They
contacted me and asked if I'd like to, if I would
consider serving if I was named. So, you know,
usually, well, I'll look at it, and I sent a CV
sometime long late in 72 or early 73. I never
thought much more about it. Then in the spring of
73, I suppose April, I was invited for an interview
But I knew that they were looking at a whole host of
people. So even I came for an interview, I never
thought very much about it.
In the meantime, the dean at the University of
Missouri had resigned,
I guess not too long after Dr. Price did. So they
started a search committee up there, too. So along
through
the spring of 1973, I knew that I was out of
consideration, both here and at Missouri. And I
didn't have any idea if I'd be selected either
place. And Denver didn't really care. So
it went on then until early summer, I suppose about
1st of July. And then one day out of the blue, Dr.
John Calhoun called me and said that I was one of
three that they had centered on. So he wanted to
know if I would come to Dallas and meet with him and
Dr. Williams and a couple of members of the Board of
Regents. And I did sometime early July. I remember
that Mr. Wells and Mr. Wittenberg, who was on the
Board of Regents at that time, and well-known to
the livestock industry, cattlemen's group and so
forth. I remember those two gentlemen were there
that day. So I flew down and met with them and still
didn't know where it was all going to wind up. but
did have a very nice meeting, I thought. Did they
ask you about plans that you might have for the vet
school? Yes, they did. They were very concerned
then about the food animal program, as we still are
after seven to eight years later, but they were
concerned about that, and they were concerned
very much about trying to strengthen the clinical
parts of the college, and so then I went on Back
home, really never. I assumed at that time that at
least there was a good bit of interest in me. And
then one day, about middle of July, Dr. Calhoun
called and offered me the position. And so then
about almost the same time, I was offered a
position at Missouri. Where in? Yes. Almost in the
same week. And I was called to meet with the
chancellor and the president of that university.
And I actually didn't know where I was going. That
must have been a very difficult decision for you.
It really was. It was a difficult decision because
Missouri was home. I had close friends, close ties
there. And of course, Texas A&M was my alma mater.
Of course, we still had family and so forth in
Texas, so it was very difficult. I thought the
opportunity for me was a little better in Texas,
better resources. And I could already see the
financial restraints in Missouri. They had been
settling in on us for the last two or three years
there before I left, since about 1970, in fact. So
finally, I elected to come to Texas. And it wasn't
an easy decision. Also, I've long since, and I
still do, believe that an administrator has a
little... It's difficult, in all honesty, to take
over a school where you have been one of the men, one
of the troops, for long years. It's very difficult
because you can't be very objective. You really
can't weigh the pros and cons of your faculty. In
other words, you think it would have been more
difficult for you to take over Missouri because
you had been a faculty member for so long.
Substantially more difficult. It really is.
That's a good point. Where here, you didn't know
most of the people. I didn't know them that well.
You still had some contacts, though. I could be far
more objective. But there are some, as we
mentioned before, Nothing is all one way or the
other. And the counter side of that argument, or
not an argument, a viewpoint, is that when you come
in from an outside and you come in as dean, you're
always the dean. And you never have close friends.
Because people don't want to, usually they don't
want to become very close friends with you.
Because they're always afraid their peers will
think that they're seeking special favor. And so
when you come in from the outside and assume a
deanship or a presidency, it's a lonely job. You
never have close friends. I never thought of that.
Very lonely. You're always the dean. There's some
kind of a feeling they keep you at arm's length.
And I'm a human sort of person. I like people. And
that's kind of a lonely position. I've never been
one. And I remember my old dean at Missouri who
recommended me for a number of jobs. And I didn't
know that he ever said this until years later. and I
don't know whether it was here or somewhere else,
and he sent a recommendation. And he said, well, he
has all the qualifications to do the job, but I'm
not sure he can ever be tough enough. And I found out
that he said that later in years. And I understand
it. I thought it was a fair and very valid
observation, but that's not my nature. Sometimes
I have trouble being tough enough. Now, when you
came down and assumed the deanship, did you have
definite aims or goals, set up, criterias that you
wanted to accomplish, ways in which you wanted to
shift the focus or move the vet school? Only
generally. I wanted to strengthen the clinical
program. That was my main and major objective.
That was partly my objective and partly what I was
told by the Board of Regents.
So I have made every effort to do that. I didn't have
a lot of preconceived opinions because I had seen a
number of administrators come into an
administrative post and start making decisions,
changing policies, changing directions, before
they really knew the inside. And I did not want to do
that. I did not want to do that. So I came in and I
tried to, number one, learn what my faculty was
like, what the internal operation was like, what
the organization was like, who I could trust, who I
couldn't, who would perform and who didn't. So I
didn't come in with a lot of preconceived ideas,
except generally, to do two things, strengthen
the clinical program and strengthen the research
program. Because I perceive both of them were very
weak when I came here. OK, we're going to talk about
those. But as we both realize, the major changes
happened under Dr. Price with the admittance of
blacks and women and a great expansion over those
years, especially concerning women. Was there
any residue when you because of that decision when
you came in a few years later. I mean, were there any
feelings against women, or were there having any
problems with women students, or anything like
that, or new women faculty members? Well, we've
tried to add as many as we could, but they were so
scarce. They hadn't been trained to be faculty
members. No. There was, perhaps, the first couple
of years I was here, There may have been a little
feeling on the part of some of the older faculty
members against the explosion in the numbers of
women. I never really felt it very much. And I
couldn't even identify individuals who felt that
way. So if there was, it didn't really matter? It
was kind of hidden, subtle. But I'm sure there was a
feeling that we were getting too many women in
school. But I don't think it was ever a major
problem. And still isn't? No. Any feelings that
might have been a decline then over the years? Oh,
yes. If there was a feeling that some of the older
faculty members, people like Dr. Bill Romaine,
Dr. Jim Denton over in the clinic who, and I don't
know that they did, but it was human. They had been
there on the firing line with the finished
product. And I think it was very human that they
might have felt a little apprehension, but that's
all gone now. I heard Dr. Romaine just last year, he
serves on the selections committee now, and he
said, you know, I never thought I'd admit it, but
the women work harder in clinics than the men do.
Really? Mm-hmm. So, yeah, it's all gone. It's been
really a revolution. One-third of your student
body are women. Mm-hmm. And there's never been a
system of quotas or anything like that, has there?
Back in the early to mid-'70s, they just started
looking at Canada. No quotas, no nothing. Never
been any. And there's none toward blacks or browns
either. However, we're having trouble getting
qualified minorities. Yeah, let's switch to that
right now. That's been probably a concern ever
since you've come here, like you said, the federal
government. and the state government could put
some pressure on you. Why don't we get blacks here?
I think we've only had one, as a matter of fact, one
graduate. One graduate, and two that ever been
admitted. One was admitted, I don't remember,
back about mid-60s, and never did complete his
work. I don't know why. I don't know if he failed
out. No, I don't think he actually failed out. I
think he became discouraged and dropped out. The
question of why. Now, through the years, we've had
some Brown students. Hispanics, there were
Hispanics in school when I was here. Sure. And as
far as I know, never any feeling that there
shouldn't be. I think always a positive feeling
toward Hispanics in school. Now, we never had
great numbers. Yeah. But we've always had some.
They still do. There were five Hispanic students
admitted in the class last year. And I think that
was out of 12. There were 12 applicants, and five
were admitted, which was higher than with the
Caucasians or whites. Well, anyhow,
the reason for the blacks, they're twofold. One,
they're not unique to Texas A&M. No other state
land grant school is overwhelmed with black
applicants either. But most of them are doing
better than we are. I think if you took all the 25
schools that are in operation now, we'd be down
close to the bottom as far as being able to attract
black students. Who would be close to the top? Ohio
State? Cornell?
Strangely enough, throughout the years, through
the whole years, now I can't say the last five
years, but through the history, Kansas State and
Iowa State have had more black graduates than any
other state. No kidding, that is unusual. Yeah,
and I don't know why. I think early on, way back
there, when old men like Dr. Evans, who was
president of Prairie View so many years, was a
veterinarian. I think way back there, they took a
few black men into school, and they did well. Like
the dean at Tuskegee for so many years, Dr.
Williams, was a Kansas State graduate. I think
that they kind of got an image early, and a few young
black men that would go to veterinary school said,
wait, I went to K-State, and I was treated well, and
I got through, and I don't know what it was. But to
build an image early on, I guess, and maybe a few
eminent men, I don't know what it was. Now,
California, a very progressive state, started a
very vigorous black recruitment program back
about 70, or maybe even 68, 70, somewhere along
there. And I heard... Dean Pritchard say at a
meeting long about 75, 76, he said we have spent
untold amount of faculty hours and finance and
everything else trying to recruit blacks and we
don't have anything to show for it. No kidding.
California has a sizable black population.
Pretty good size and it's progressive, you know,
it has a national image of being progressive. This
is at UC Davis? UC Davis. I think UC Davis have had
maybe a few more than we've had. Maybe altogether
they've had seven or eight graduates, black
graduates. But they haven't done very well. And at
least, Dean Pritchard said, compared to the
effort we spent, our success rate's been woefully
inadequate. But to get back to- So no one's doing
very well. No one's doing very well. No, that's
right. Because most of the blacks are still going
to Tuskegee. The honest truth is no. No one is doing
very well. But unfortunately, we are not even
doing as well as some of the others. Do any whites go
to Tuskegee? Yes. About 40% of the class is white.
Really? They only take about 60 a year. And I think
about 20 are white. So, yes, they do. They can't get
enough blacks to fill their class. Really? And
they recruit vigorously. from places like
Prairie View. And we've been, last year or so,
we've been working pretty hard trying to build our
image at Prairie View. It's partly, I guess,
response to the federal pressure, but
I don't know. Our first efforts were, maybe they
were inadequate on our part, but they didn't
receive much encouragement at Prairie View. uh dr
bay would go down and present a program on
opportunities in veterinary medicine and so
forth to a group of students at prairie view and we
got some pretty stony looks and not much
enthusiasm and more recently we've had dr thomas
has thrown his weight behind it and we're getting a
different reaction now why is that i think because
the president says uh we want to We want to try to
build a prevent program and get some students in
it, Texas A&M. And I think his visibility, his
prestige, kind of caught on. And now the dean of
agriculture and the head of biology department
and so forth, they began to work with us and talk to
us. OK, so the first one was that no university is
doing very well. That's true. What was your other
one? Well, the other point is Texas A&M doesn't
have a good image among blacks in Texas. Right. And
that's just everybody. They just don't think
they're... I don't know. It's so conservative, I
guess, and so militaristic, and so maybe in their
eyes, redneck, and I don't know what else. I'm not a
sociologist enough to understand. But Black
students don't look on Texas A&M as a place they
want to go. Exceptions, of course. So I think we've
had to overcome that. And I have to be absolutely
honest. I've had an awful lot of problems with
Texas A&M. A lot of things I had to devote my
attention to. The Texas Southwestern cattle
raisers were on our backs because we weren't
getting enough rural kids in school.
Pressures from here and there, in other words, to
try to move ahead. And we've had an unbelievable
problem with our admission system because people
can't understand why their sons and daughters
can't get in school. Well, let's talk about these.
This is the next thing I want to talk about. And
these are the challenges that you've had since 73.
Let's talk about these right now. For example, the
pressures. Well, who are the people that have been
pressuring the vet school? They've been heavy for
admissions. That's perhaps the greatest
pressure. And they've come from every which
place, every direction. They come from
veterinarians whose sons and daughters who know
that their son and their daughter were far better
qualified for admission than they were in the
1940s, 50s, and 60s. And so why can't Susie or Bill
get admitted? And I understand, but they don't.
They don't stop and realize that there are 500 to
600 highly qualified young people every year, and
we can only take 138. And so why? They
intellectually can accept it, but internalize,
they can't. They can't internalize it. It's a
proud father. So we've had a lot of that sort of
thing. We've had a lot of pressure from the
livestock producers who are saying that what
we're doing is educating a lot of dog and cat
doctors. I see. And that we're not educating young
people willing to go back to the ports of the
branch, to the towns with the last picture show
image, and practice. Get out to the ranch. Yeah, it
is tough. In Texas, there's a lot of areas in Texas
where veterinary service is not very good, and the
cattle raisers can't understand why the young
people don't stay out there. But they can't make a
living. Or they can't make a very good living. They
have to sit in a pickup all day and drive 30 and 40
miles on the call. And their wives have to live in a
small town with an inadequate school system. And
shopping centers are not much good. Educational
systems are not very good. So we've had a lot to
overcome there. So the pressures from that group
have been. Then more recently, pressures from the
minorities. Well, in what way are the minorities?
I mean, are you having office calls from? Corps or
NAACP or something like that? Not any of them. Have
you? One of the real parts of the people, one of the
individuals that's really been on this route
recently is a lady from the Houston area,
Wilhelmina Delco, who is a member of the
legislature from Houston area. And she'd been on
the university over at Prairie View anyway. So she
found a weakness. She found a little Achilles heel
because we haven't had any blacks. And she's angry
that A&M over Prairie View anyway, so she's using
us as kind of a whipping boy. But yes, we've had a
good bed of politicians after us over the minority
from both, not so much the LULAC group, the Browns,
because they really can't build a very good case
against us. We can show them that we've taken a good
number of the Brown students that have applied.
But we don't have a good defense when we say we've
had one black here since the whole history of the
school. We've graduated 3,600 veterinarians and
one black.
In spite of the fact that we can see the reasons,
it's hard to defend. How many blacks applied last
year? One. That made the minimum. One young woman,
academic score was something like 473 out of 483.
So she was so far down, she didn't get an interview.
But then she reported us to the Office of
Education. Oh, I say she did. Let me back up.
Somebody did. I would guess it was her or someone
that knew her. So earlier we were talking about the
reporting. We filed about seven reports with the
Office of Education. Just dealing with that one
particular case, seven reports? Oh, five or six or
seven. Well, a number of reports. Several, yeah.
Discussing that situation and why she was there.
Justifying it, giving all kinds of background
data about our program. And of course we've had
that pretty well because we have learned that we
have to have it. So we can drag out the statistics on
the numbers of applicants, number of
qualifications, how they were selected. We've
gone to a highly mechanized system of selection
just in our own defense.
OK, let's talk about other pressures, not only
minorities and livestock groups. And people were
upset about admissions. Any other ones? Well,
there was a lot of upset about our clinical
program. A lot of veterinarians and livestock
people were saying that our graduates were not
capable of entering the modern day field of
agribusiness and in herd health management. And
there was some truth to their arguments. Because
of the curriculum, or why weren't they prepared?
Well, it's curriculum, and it's a philosophical
problem that it's very difficult to educate the
young person to handle the individual case, the
concept of medicine that we've always had, where
the youngster has to first learn what the normal
animal is, what the sick animal is, how to make a
differential diagnosis, and then apply
treatment, therapy, and recommendations for
correction. So that is basically what the
veterinary student has to learn. Now, as a result
of the change in agriculture and as a result of the
loss of the family farm, the veterinarian no
longer can practice the kind of medicine that he or
she could have in 1950, the kind of thing that James
Heratt talks about in All Creatures Great and
Small, where the individually sick animal, and
veterinarians refer to this as emergency
practice, or they use another term, fire engine
practice, where you just respond to emergencies,
which is what veterinarians did up until 20 years
ago. Then comes the shift away from the small
family farms, either to big family farms or
industrial farms, factory farms, whatever you
call them, where they're highly specialized and a
farm may have
half a million or $200,000 chicks or laying hens or
turkeys, or they may keep 300 sows, brood sows, or
they go to enormous numbers of cattle and feed
yards or own ranches and farms. And so all of a
sudden we are looking at herd health medicine,
emphasis on prevention rather than treatment.
Well, that creates a dichotomy in the educational
process. Number one, the first thing you have to do
is to teach the youngster the normal animal and how
to diagnose a sick animal. Then he or she has to
become a consultant, you might say, a medical
management person. And in order to do that, how can
you do that all in four years? And so that's the
dilemma we've been struggling with. And that's
why we've made a lot of changes on our clinical
program. OK. For example, what type of changes?
Well, we shifted the curriculum to a block system,
or a segmented system, where the old system
students would go to school, and they'd have
surgery Monday, Wednesday, and Friday. And
they'd have infectious diseases Tuesday,
Thursday, and these kinds of things, which kept
them on campus. all time. So we shifted to a block
system of education. And they'll have five weeks
of surgery, or they'll have five weeks of small
animal medicine, or this or that. And in the
five-week span, they'll have five weeks that they
can devote to an externship and a five-week that
they can devote to an elective. And this allows us
to get the students off campus, into educational
experiences off campus. Because you can't teach
it all. On-the-job training. More on-the-job
training than is what we're, yeah. You can't teach
it all on campus. It just can't be done in a big
teaching hospital. The teaching hospital has a
certain role. It's a good role to learn diagnostic
medicine, comparative diagnosis, that kind of
thing. They can learn all about the latest
techniques in radiology, nuclear medicine,
anesthesiology, all these things. Especially in
the food animal medicine and in herd health
management, the student has to get off campus. So
we now have training programs and resident
teachers in the Texas Department of Corrections
at Sugar Land and at Huntsville. And we have
teachers there. And now we have a training
teaching program at Amarillo in the feed yards in
the intensive livestock production. And
students can go there for two to five weeks. They go
to the prison one week, rotation. They can rotate
back through again if they want. So we've
broadened our exposure. But even in spite of it
all, we still cannot teach these youngsters to be
herd health managers and livestock disease
consultants.